add disk recovery for ZK case (#11)
fvaleri/strimzi-debugging: sessions/006/README.md

pvc-1a66039a-14e7-4416-9319-6d6437543c02   20Gi       RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-kafka-0                                         ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            18m
pvc-ca348d35-f466-446e-9f93-e3c15722d214   20Gi       RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-kafka-2                                         ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            18m
```

> <br/>

Reviewer: Add an empty line after this, otherwise rendering is screwed up.

Author: Oh, checking.

pvc-1a66039a-14e7-4416-9319-6d6437543c02   20Gi       RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-kafka-0                                         ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            18m
pvc-ca348d35-f466-446e-9f93-e3c15722d214   20Gi       RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-kafka-2                                         ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            18m
```

> 
> =====
> 
> ### ZOOKEEPER

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br/>
```

---

> ### Example: no space left on device WITHOUT volume expansion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: ZooKeeper storage failure with lost quorum (offline recovery)
```

This procedure has some tricky steps highlighted in bold, where you need to be extra careful to avoid losing data.
**Don't use Minikube for this example, as it doesn't have full volume support.**

First, [deploy the Strimzi Cluster Operator](/sessions/001).
For the sake of this example, we deploy the Kafka cluster reducing the disk size.

```sh
$ cat sessions/001/resources/000-my-cluster.yaml \
    | yq ".spec.zookeeper.storage.size = \"1Mi\"" \
    | kubectl create -f -
kafka.kafka.strimzi.io/my-cluster created

$ kubectl create -f sessions/001/resources/001-my-topic.yaml
kafkatopic.kafka.strimzi.io/my-topic created
```

> When the cluster is ready, break the zookeeper by creating 3 topics and 1000 partitions per topic, which exceeds the disk capacity of 1 MiB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the cluster is ready, break zookeeper by creating 3 topics with 1000 partitions each, which exceeds the disk capacity of 1 MiB.
```

> When the cluster is ready, break the zookeeper by creating 3 topics and 1000 partitions per topic, which exceeds the disk capacity of 1 MiB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the cluster is ready, break ZooKeeper by creating 3 topics with 1000 partitions each, which exceeds the disk capacity of 1 MiB.
```

```sh
$ CLUSTER_NAME="my-cluster" \
  ZK_PODS="$(kubectl get po -l strimzi.io/name=my-cluster-zookeeper --no-headers -o custom-columns=':metadata.name')" \
  NEW_PV_CLASS="$(kubectl get pv | grep my-cluster-zookeeper-0 | awk '{print $7}')" \
  NEW_PV_SIZE="100Mi"

$ kubectl get pvc -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
NAME                          STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS                           AGE
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0   Bound    pvc-7979a0d6-17e3-4ccc-adf5-72fd033073ee   1Mi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   6m
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1   Bound    pvc-787734b0-c3e4-4068-a964-dc56802ccb65   1Mi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   6m
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2   Bound    pvc-2250763e-0d8c-4e78-9c3b-5e00ec40970a   1Mi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   6m

> 

Reviewer: Remove extra empty line.

> 

Reviewer: Remove extra empty line.

> $ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t0 --create --partitions 1000 && \
> kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t1 --create --partitions 1000 && \
> kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t2 --create --partitions 1000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --create --topic t0 --partitions 1000 \
  && kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --create --topic t1 --partitions 1000 \
  && kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --create --topic t2 --partitions 1000
```

> $ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t0 --create --partitions 1000 && \
> kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t1 --create --partitions 1000 && \
> kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t2 --create --partitions 1000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --create --topic t0 --partitions 1000 \
  && kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --create --topic t1 --partitions 1000 \
  && kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --create --topic t2 --partitions 1000
```

Created topic t0.
Created topic t1.
Error while executing topic command : The request timed out.
[2024-02-29 09:42:21,758] ERROR org.apache.kafka.common.errors.TimeoutException: The request timed out.
 (kafka.admin.TopicCommand$)

$ kubectl get po -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
NAME                     READY   STATUS             RESTARTS        AGE
my-cluster-zookeeper-0   0/1     CrashLoopBackOff   5 (2m16s ago)   16m
my-cluster-zookeeper-1   0/1     CrashLoopBackOff   5 (2m24s ago)   16m
my-cluster-zookeeper-2   1/1     Running            0               16m

$ kubectl logs $CLUSTER_NAME-zoookeeper-0 | grep "No space left on device" | tail -n1
java.io.IOException: No space left on device
```

> Even if not all pods are failed, we still need to increase the volume size of all brokers because the storage configuration is shared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even if not all pods are failed, we still need to increase the volume size of all servers because the storage configuration is shared.
```

**Before deleting the Kafka cluster, make sure that delete claim storage configuration is set to false in Kafka resource.**

```sh
$ if [[ $(kubectl get k $CLUSTER_NAME -o yaml | yq .spec.zookeeper.storage.deleteClaim) == "false" ]]; then kubectl delete k $CLUSTER_NAME; fi
kafka.kafka.strimzi.io "my-cluster" deleted
```

> Create new and bigger volumes for our brokers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create new and bigger volumes for our servers.
```

In this case, volumes are created automatically, but you may need to create them manually.

```sh
$ for pod in $ZK_PODS; do
  cat sessions/006/resources/pvc-new.yaml \
    | yq ".metadata.name = \"data-$pod-new\" \
      | .metadata.labels.\"strimzi.io/name\" = \"$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper\" \
      | .spec.storageClassName = \"$NEW_PV_CLASS\" \
      | .spec.resources.requests.storage = \"$NEW_PV_SIZE\"" \
    | kubectl create -f -
done
persistentvolumeclaim/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0-new created
persistentvolumeclaim/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1-new created
persistentvolumeclaim/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2-new created

> 

Reviewer: Remove extra empty line.

$ kubectl get pvc -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
NAME                              STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS                           AGE
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0       Bound    pvc-7979a0d6-17e3-4ccc-adf5-72fd033073ee   1Mi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   19m
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0-new   Bound    pvc-609ec479-4e6a-483d-8f3c-7c10841a41b2   100Mi      RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   26s
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1       Bound    pvc-787734b0-c3e4-4068-a964-dc56802ccb65   1Mi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   19m
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1-new   Bound    pvc-7f462f51-f32b-4d17-a05d-af6497e5940e   100Mi      RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   24s
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2       Bound    pvc-2250763e-0d8c-4e78-9c3b-5e00ec40970a   1Mi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   19m
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2-new   Bound    pvc-ddb39dbe-3e15-4757-9af8-fc3c498a01ab   100Mi      RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   23s

> 

Reviewer: Remove extra empty line.

```

> **Set the persistent volume reclaim policy to Retain, in order to avoid losing broker data when deleting Kafka PVCs.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Set the persistent volume reclaim policy to Retain, in order to avoid losing server data when deleting ZooKeeper PVCs.**
```

pvc-609ec479-4e6a-483d-8f3c-7c10841a41b2   100Mi      RWO            Retain           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0-new                                 ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            99s
pvc-787734b0-c3e4-4068-a964-dc56802ccb65   1Mi        RWO            Retain           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            20m
pvc-7979a0d6-17e3-4ccc-adf5-72fd033073ee   1Mi        RWO            Retain           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            20m
pvc-7f462f51-f32b-4d17-a05d-af6497e5940e   100Mi      RWO            Retain           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1-new                                 ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            98s
pvc-ddb39dbe-3e15-4757-9af8-fc3c498a01ab   100Mi      RWO            Retain           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2-new                                 ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            96s
```

> Copy all broker data from the old volumes to the new volumes spinning up a maintenance pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy all server data from the old volumes to the new volumes spinning up a maintenance pod.
```

Note that the following commands may take some time, depending on the amount of data they have to copy.

```sh
$ for pod in $ZK_PODS; do
  kubectl run kubectl-copy-$pod -itq --rm --restart "Never" --image "foo" --overrides "$(cat sessions/006/resources/patch.yaml \
    | yq ".spec.volumes[0].persistentVolumeClaim.claimName = \"data-$pod\", .spec.volumes[1].persistentVolumeClaim.claimName = \"data-$pod-new\"" \
    | yq -p yaml -o json)"
done
'/old/data/myid' -> '/new/data/myid'
'/old/data/version-2/currentEpoch' -> '/new/data/version-2/currentEpoch'
'/old/data/version-2/log.200000001' -> '/new/data/version-2/log.200000001'
'/old/data/version-2/acceptedEpoch' -> '/new/data/version-2/acceptedEpoch'
'/old/data/version-2/snapshot.0' -> '/new/data/version-2/snapshot.0'
'/old/data/version-2' -> '/new/data/version-2'
'/old/data' -> '/new/data'
'/old/logs' -> '/new/logs'
'/old/lost+found' -> '/new/lost+found'
...
```

> After that, we need to create the conditions for them to be reattached by the Kafka cluster.
> Delete the all Kafka PVCs and PV claim references, just before creating the final PVCs with the new storage size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, we need to create the conditions for them to be reattached by the ZooKeeper cluster.
Delete the all ZooKeeper PVCs and PV claim references, just before creating the final PVCs with the new storage size.
```

persistentvolume/pvc-7f462f51-f32b-4d17-a05d-af6497e5940e patched
persistentvolumeclaim/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1 created
persistentvolumeclaim "data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2" deleted
persistentvolumeclaim "data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2-new" deleted
persistentvolume/pvc-2250763e-0d8c-4e78-9c3b-5e00ec40970a patched
persistentvolume/pvc-ddb39dbe-3e15-4757-9af8-fc3c498a01ab patched
persistentvolumeclaim/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2 created

$ kubectl get pvc -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
NAME                          STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS                           AGE
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0   Bound    pvc-609ec479-4e6a-483d-8f3c-7c10841a41b2   100Mi      RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   29s
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1   Bound    pvc-7f462f51-f32b-4d17-a05d-af6497e5940e   100Mi      RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   22s
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2   Bound    pvc-ddb39dbe-3e15-4757-9af8-fc3c498a01ab   100Mi      RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   15s
```

Deploy the Kafka cluster with our brand new volumes, and then try to consume some data.

> **Don't forget to adjust the storage size in Zookeeper custom resource.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Don't forget to adjust the ZooKeeper storage size in Kafka custom resource.**
```

Author: Ah, right, I just replaced Kafka with Zookeeper. Haha.

my-cluster-entity-operator-7d6d6bd454-sh7rc   3/3     Running   0          96s
my-cluster-kafka-0                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-kafka-1                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-kafka-2                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-zookeeper-0                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s
my-cluster-zookeeper-1                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s
my-cluster-zookeeper-2                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s

$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t0 --describe
Topic: t0	TopicId: O_jLcdCZQuyNgxSGNOZDHg	PartitionCount: 1000	ReplicationFactor: 3	Configs: min.insync.replicas=2,message.format.version=3.0-IV1
	Topic: t0	Partition: 0	Leader: 1	Replicas: 1,2,0	Isr: 1,0,2
	Topic: t0	Partition: 1	Leader: 1	Replicas: 0,1,2	Isr: 1,0,2
	Topic: t0	Partition: 2	Leader: 1	Replicas: 2,0,1	Isr: 1,0,2
	Topic: t0	Partition: 3	Leader: 1	Replicas: 1,0,2	Isr: 1,0,2
	...
	Topic: t0	Partition: 999	Leader: 1	Replicas: 0,1,2	Isr: 1,0,2

> kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t1 --describe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t1 --describe
```

Topic: t1	TopicId: Zz3T1a_hQiGvHv8LLK7H9Q	PartitionCount: 1000	ReplicationFactor: 3	Configs: min.insync.replicas=2,message.format.version=3.0-IV1
	Topic: t1	Partition: 0	Leader: 1	Replicas: 1,0,2	Isr: 1,0,2
	Topic: t1	Partition: 1	Leader: 1	Replicas: 0,2,1	Isr: 1,0,2
	Topic: t1	Partition: 2	Leader: 1	Replicas: 2,1,0	Isr: 1,0,2
	Topic: t1	Partition: 3	Leader: 1	Replicas: 1,2,0	Isr: 1,0,2
	...
	Topic: t1	Partition: 999	Leader: 1	Replicas: 0,1,2	Isr: 1,0,2
```
We can also get the topic t2's information even though it caused disk full when creating topic t2.
If this command didn't show expected results, try to run the command later since zookeeper also needs time to do data recovery.

```

> kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --describe --topic t2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --describe --topic t2
```

Topic: t2	TopicId: LCYz44eWSYmMA1xhY9BpdQ	PartitionCount: 1000	ReplicationFactor: 3	Configs: min.insync.replicas=2,message.format.version=3.0-IV1
	Topic: t2	Partition: 0	Leader: 0	Replicas: 1,0,2	Isr: 0,1,2
	Topic: t2	Partition: 1	Leader: 0	Replicas: 0,2,1	Isr: 0,1,2
	Topic: t2	Partition: 2	Leader: 0	Replicas: 2,1,0	Isr: 0,1,2
	Topic: t2	Partition: 3	Leader: 0	Replicas: 1,2,0	Isr: 0,1,2
	...
	Topic: t2	Partition: 999	Leader: 0	Replicas: 1,2,0	Isr: 0,1,2
```

> 

Reviewer: Remove extra empty line.

persistentvolume "pvc-a148ee8b-2eef-422b-a35e-b71714b1ef85" deleted

$ kubectl patch pv $(kubectl get pv | grep "$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper" | awk '{print $1}') --type merge -p '
    spec:
      persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy: Delete'
persistentvolume/pvc-0bd38196-2f5b-4a05-8917-b43bd2dde50b patched
persistentvolume/pvc-1a66039a-14e7-4416-9319-6d6437543c02 patched
persistentvolume/pvc-ca348d35-f466-446e-9f93-e3c15722d214 patched

$ kubectl get pv | grep $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
pvc-0bd38196-2f5b-4a05-8917-b43bd2dde50b   20Gi       RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1                                         ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            18m
pvc-1a66039a-14e7-4416-9319-6d6437543c02   20Gi       RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0                                         ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            18m
pvc-ca348d35-f466-446e-9f93-e3c15722d214   20Gi       RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2                                         ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            18m

> ```

Reviewer: These are the PVs from the Kafka example. Did you forget to update?

Author: No, I thought on one would notice it...:)
